>> Brian Holt: We're gonna do quickly,
two kinds of sorts.
These are really fun,
I think these are really cool.
They seem a little magical.
Just that this is never how I would
ever think about a problem but
now that I understand how they work,
I think they're really cool.
So part one of this course covers
a ton of sorting algorithms,
I think you should
definitely check it out.
I just added two more kinda the two
biggest ones I didn't talk about..
So let's go ahead and talk about these,
let's talk about Heaps first.
So Heaps are an interesting thing.
So I just wanna disambiguate there,
they are Heaps and
then you use Heaps to do Heap Sort, okay?
So those are kind of two separate
concepts but they are tied together.
So Heap is a data structure, okay?
And specifically,
it's actually a kind of a tree, but
what's interesting about it is it's a tree
that you can represent as an array.
So basically we're doing
it in such a way that we're
gonna be able to represent a whole
tree just as a flat array.
I'll explain to you in just
a second how that works.
Often you'll hear Heaps referred
to as priority queues and
you'll hear priority queues
referred to as Heaps.
They use those terms interchangeably,
they're not exactly the same thing.
However, normally priority
queues are implemented as Heaps.
And the reason being is that they
just lend themselves very well to
how priority queues are supposed to work.
And again,
I will get to that in just a second.
So, a binary Heap is an array that
you kind of squish a tree into.
This is similar to a binary search tree,
everything I'm about to
tell you is similar but
they are still quite different.
So I just wanted to call out why they're
dissimilar and why they're the same.
So binary Heap is always an array.
A BST is made up of node objects
typically that doesn't necessarily have
to be the truth, but usually.
With BSTs, binary search trees, there's
a very strict order that everything in
the left subtree is smaller
than the current node.
And everything in the right
subtree is always bigger.
The only guarantee a Heap gives you is
the current node is bigger
than both of its children.
It's the only guarantee.
So that is to say that there
could be things in the,
just because something is the left child
of something doesn't mean everything on
the right tree is bigger than that.
The only guarantee is that you have the
root node would be the largest number in
the array, right?
Because the root node is bigger than
everything in the left tree, and
bigger than everything in the right tree,
and that's always true.
So that transitive property means that
everything in those children would be
smaller than also then the root node.
That's the only guarantee thata you have.
>> Brian Holt: If you're doing
in order traversal of the BST,
you'll get a sort of list.
If you do an in order
traversal of a binary Heap,
you will get nonsense,
so that doesn't help.
And a binary Heap is what we
call a complete binary tree.
That means that everything
is filled out and
shifted as far to the left as possible.
So do I have I do, so
if we're looking here at this right
notice everything has shifted
as far left as possible.
That's not always true of a BST right
cuz it can be sparse I could have
a child here I could have a child here.
That doesn't work with binary Heaps
it has to be as compact as possible.
And the reason being that,
because we're gonna represent it as an
array it has to be as compact as possible.
They come in two falvors,
flavors, I can spell.
We're just concerned with max heaps today,
but as you may imagine a min heap
would just be basically the inverse of
everything that we're talking about.
But today we're gonna be only
worrying about max Heaps.
So this is why priority queue
is typically a binary Heap,
is that with a priority queue,
the only thing that you
actually really care about is the next
thing to come out of the queue, right?
And a priority queue is basically
a queue where it's first in, first out.
But it's actually a little bit more
complicated than that because you're also
worried about some priority, right?
So if something is really high priority,
you want it to go to the front
of the queue, right?
That's why a Heap works really well for
this because it's always going to
give you the most important thing.
And then once you remove it then you're
gonna pull out the next thing that's
the most important and
you're just gonna keep doing that.
And that's actually how a HeapSort works,
right?
Because if we're able to always find
the largest number in some array,
can't we just keep dequeuing things and
then adding them to the end until
eventually the whole thing is sorted?
So that's basically what a Heap Sort is,
is you construct this priority queue and
then you keep dequeuing things until
eventually you have a sorted array.
Make sense?
Probably not, but that's okay,
we're getting there.
So let's talk about the magical property
that we're representing a tree in
an array because that's
probably kinda strange, right?
So if I have this as my Heap,
this is a min Heap.
But it works the same way,
it doesn't matter that it's a min or maxi.
And in this case the one is the smallest
number in this particular array, right?
So you can see here that it's
represented at the element, right?
And then we just kind
of insert them in order
as if it was like
a breadth-first traversal.
So then five and three then seven
then nine then eight, right?
So just go one, two, three,
four, five, six, right?
And just keep doing that for
the entire thing.
If you do it like that,
then that means if I'm on index one
then at 2n+1 excuse me, 2 plus 1 is 3.
That's going to be the left child, right?
So if I'm at 5, then at 3 is going
to be the left child, right?
And if I'm at 2, right?
So I'm gonna be 5, then the,
yeah.
>> Brian Holt: If I'm at index 2,
which is 3, then if I go to 2n + 1 which
is index five it's gonna be 8, right?
So that math formula is
how you find the left and
right children,
that always holds true, right?
If I'm on index 100 then
it's gonna be 2n plus 1.
So it's gonna be 201 is going
to be the left child and
202 is going to be the right child.
Do we see how that kinda relationship
works in terms of how you represent it
as a in memory?
That's why it's important that it's
compact and complete binary tree is so
you can hold that formula true, okay?
>> Brian Holt: Okay
so,
>> Brian Holt: What you need to
do is you need to construct a Heap
cuz I'm gonna give you a list
of totally unsorted numbers.
And the guarantees that I
want to have about this that
the first item in the array is going to be
the largest number in the array is not yet
true because that array could be anything.
So what you need to do is you
need to Heapify this array,
did not make up that term,
that's what it's called, Heapify.
Heapify.
So that's what we're gonna do.
We're gonna make a max heap
out of the array that you gave
me.
>> Brian Holt: So,
>> Brian Holt: Let's talk about Heapify
first.
>> Brian Holt: So
I'm gonna start at index 5.
>> Brian Holt: Which
is going to be value 9, right?
So what you're gonna do is you're gonna
start at the midpoint of the array.
And you're gonna work backwards one by one
until you get to the front of the array,
which will make sense here momentarily,
just by the properties
of how heapify works.
So I started at index 5 and it's value 9.
So then you're gonna try and
basically move it so
that the Heapify the Heap Sort
properties of it are hold true.
So it's left child of index 5 is 11.
And it's right child is index 12.
Both of those are out of balance for
this particular array, right?
So we don't do anything.
So nothing to do, next iteration.
So i-- then we go to index 4,
which is 1, right?
Then the left child Is index 9 value 7,
and the right child is index 10,
out of bounds.
Because the largest index
in here is index 9.
So 7 is larger than 1, so
we swap the left child and the parent.
So, 7 is larger than 1, so
we're going to swap those.
You can see here, we have 7, 1.
Then we call heapify on index 9 and
it does nothing.
That's kind of the pattern
we're going to do.
We're going to keep calling this Heapify
function that's going to check to see.
I have the parent, and I have the left
child, and I have the right child.
And the greatest of those will
be swapped with the parent.
So if I have a left child that's 5,
and a right child that's 6 and
a parent that's 3.
I'm gonna grab 6 and
I'm gonna swap that with the 3.
On the next generation if I have index 10,
or sorry,
value 10 and that's the biggest one,
then I just don't swap anything, right?
So you just want to make sure that
the largest number is always the parent.
I go through exhaustively here and
do that but
the basic gist is just what I said here.
Let's just go here.
So, say this is our index at this point.
So, I'm gonna call heapify and value 3,
which is 0, 1, 2, 3 which will be 10.
So the right child is 4 right?
And the left child is,
where am I getting mixed up here?
Heapify index does nothing, value 3.
Value, so that's gonna be 1, 2, 3.
>> Brian Holt: I must have right, okay,
value 3 index one, right?
Index one is 3, right?
So you can see here it's gonna swap 3 and
10 because 3 is smaller than 10.
And 10 is larger than 7.
So that is why you see here 10
swapped with 3 and then because we
did that we don't have any guarantees
about what's below that in the Heap.
So we have to call Heapify again on 3.
That make sense?
Eventually you're going to end up
with an array that looks like this.
So this is what a Heap looks like.
So if I go to 10,
10 is larger than both 7 and 9.
And let's just take a look at 7.
If I go 7 two to the right
gonna be at 6 and 5.
It's definitely larger than both of those.
And then if I go to 6 that's index 3.
So I have to look at 7 and 8, right?
So 4, 5, so 3 and 4, right,
it's larger than 3 and 4 as well, right?
So that's what a Heap looks like.
So the only guarantee that I have
in here is that 10 is definitely
the largest number in here, right?
Now what's cool, when you de-queue
something from a priority queue,
all you have to do is swap in this number.
So what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna swap
in the one to the 10 like I do here.
10 is definitely the largest
number on the array, right?
Because that's what the Heap told us.
And now I just call heapify on this,
and It's going to say,
swap with 9, and then it's just going
to move down until 1 ends up down here.
And now this is what my priority queue
looks like 9 is the largest number.
We have that guarantee, so
we're going to swap that.
And you're gonna end up with 9 here,
and you're swapping that with 4,
just call Heapify on 4,
so on and so forth.
Until, actually let me show
you the completed one just so
you see what it looks like.
>> Brian Holt: Where is my output for
this?
There it is, okay?
So I called it with this huge array.
And you can see here over time all of this
right here is just constructing the heap,
right?
Until eventually you get
50 being the largest here.
And then I just de-queuing things
until eventually you can see
this this just starts growing
until eventually the whole list
is sorted
>> Brian Holt: So
the first half of heap sort
is creating a max heap, and
the second part is just de-queuing things
until eventually you have a sorted list.
So that is the general
premise of what Heap Sort
is.
>> Brian Holt: Any questions
about in general what
the process of what Heap Sort
is?
>> Speaker 2: When comparing
AVL trees with binary
Heap a sort of apples
to oranges comparison.
>> Brian Holt: Yeah,
that's a good question.
Is the comparison between AVL trees and
Heaps apples to oranges?
They're used for very different purposes.
They share a commonality that they're both
representation of trees, in some capacity.
But you wouldn't, they don't really
have much overlap in terms of use
case.
>> Brian Holt: You
construct AVL trees to be able to
search something very quickly.
So I have database index, and
I wanna be able to find something
in the database very, very quickly so
that I would construct a AVL tree for
that, or
some sort of binary source tree variant.
And I need to construct a priority queue,
so therefore I construct a Heap.
They are trees, but
they're different flavors of trees.